---
ID: 258
post_title: >
  Rendezvous with Dr. Muthukrishnan
  Jayaraman
author: freerunner
post_excerpt: ""
layout: page
permalink: >
  http://www.freerunners.in/index.php/rendezvous-with-dr-muthukrishnan-jayaraman/
published: true
post_date: 2015-07-27 05:30:03
---
<div class="container">

<a href="http://www.freerunners.in/index.php/stories-2/">&lt;&lt; Back </a>

Fondly known as the Kangaroo of our pack, he is our very own <em><strong>“runaddict”</strong></em> who has improved his full marathon time by<strong> 22 minutes (4:10 to 3:48)</strong> in one year! He joined us a year back and has been an inspiration for all of us ever since. He has one of the best running forms amongst us. When you have a health issue or an injury, he is one of the first ones to message you with the right advice. You spend few minutes with him and you cannot escape his witty yet humorous comebacks to everything you say. He is a serving officer with Indian Army and has served in tough terrains such as Siachen glacier. You will often see him walking his four legged ‘son’, Tutu when he is not running or working. My evening chat with Muthu and his better half Rajee Ma’am in the Turf club was a time well spent. Although it is hard to match a face-to-face conversation with penned down words, I will do my best in conveying what I learnt that evening. In a nutshell, he personifies the consistency of a mule, the courage of a lion and the spirit of a wild stallion.

Before he got hooked to long distance running, Muthu’s fitness training involved going to the gym few times a week and occasional 5kms run as part of the Indian Army fitness test. His earliest memories of running goes back to seeing his elder brother Vishy run, which he used to do in his IIT days as well before becoming the now famous Gandhian Runner. After Muthu was done with his medical degrees, a billboard of<strong> Chandigarh Marathon</strong> caught his attention when was driving back from Srinagar. He had only four weeks to prepare, but he decided to give it shot. He did not have a group to train with, so he followed the online training program by Running and Living. He fondly remembers his first half marathon in Jan 2010 With Running &amp; Living’s Rahul Verghese; he ran non-stop without any water breaks since he thought stopping would mean not being able to start again and finished in 1:48! Although the next two weeks were quite grueling for him, he got hooked on to long distance running. His discussions with Vishy about running became more frequent. Rajee mentions, <strong>“Muthu is a sincere kind of guy. Once he sets his heart on something, he goes for it, no matter how unfavourable the conditions are. I thought it would end with the half marathon, but the least did I know that it was only a beginning. Every time he came from an event, he would sign up for another one</strong>”. Running in events provided him regular targets to work on and thus kept his running on track and also increased his acquaintances to runners across the country. Back then when he started running, number of long distance runners were only a few, so making friends was easier. Especially when there was no group to challenge him enough, running in events helped him to measure his performance. When he was in Chandigarh, he used to be a regular in Delhi events, even though they were never cheap.

For the longest time, Muthu trained alone in spite of the extreme weather conditions in Chandigarh. This needs some kind of grit and determination. Some of us who started running with a group sometimes oversee the cushion we get because we have such a well organized group to train us and push us. When he did his long runs alone, he either carried his own hydration support or stopped at points on the way for water. Out there he did not have an organized water support system that we have in our Sunday runs. “One thing about training alone is that the run starts and ends at home. There is no motivation that we have in Free Runners here to do the post run cool down or stretching”, reiterates Muthu about the advantages of training in a group.

A year after his first Half Marathon, Muthu signed up for SCMM. A month before his first SCMM, he was called upon by his colleagues to play basketball. Within few minutes of the game, he incurred a bad injury, first a ligament tear in the knee area and later a calf muscle tear that kept him out of running for next 5 months. Not only did it keep him from running, there was a risk to his promotion as well since fitness is one of the parameters considered for promotions in Indian Armed Forces. He was devastated because he had to cancel his SCMM run. Rajee was worried since there was a chance of him getting operated as well, which fortunately did not happen. Not running can be depressing and Rajee said, Muthu was careful not to pass on that depression to his family. He tried many things at that time, rest, cycling, cross training, and so on, but nothing could match the joy he got from running. He visited few orthopedic surgeons, who asked him to rest and stop running long distances. This is the last thing a runner wants to hear, definitely not when injured. He acknowledges how scanty sports physicians are in India and how recovery can be a problem if you are not going to the right one. One big draw back about injury is that one tends to give up and getting over that mental block poses a bigger challenge even after the body has recovered. Muthu recollects, <strong>“It made me a more humble person. You could go very far, but you know that one injury is all it takes to bring you back to square one. It was a challenge then when Tutu would want to walk fast sometimes. Even when I saw kids running on the road or people walking fast, I wished I could run again!”</strong>

Rajee quietly told me that Muthu became a more spiritual person at that time, to which our ‘docathlete’ shied away with a smile. He responded, “You tend to believe in everything at times like these, I really thought I could never run again”. He finally went to a friend of his colleague at NIS, Patiala, Dr Jahnavi, a sports Medicine specialist, who also treats national level athletes. She put him on a 16 weeks rehabilitation program, which included “active rest” that included some walk, run and muscle strengthening routine. That brought Muthu back to running, much stronger and better. He could run and walk a 10k in Jan 2012. There were two high points for him in that run: one that his daughter ran 10k and second was his meeting with the legendary Fauja Singh. He did his next HM during course to recovery at Corbett in April 2012 in 2:10.

Muthu remembers his first full marathon, which also happens to be his most memorable run. He had signed up for the Puducherry Full Marathon in Feb 2011, a rather difficult route for first time full marathon runners. He had rested everything on his brother Vishy, who he had hoped would push him through. Vishy had to cancel in the last moment because of professional commitments and Muthu had to do it all by himself. That morning when he was running his way to the starting point, he thought he would lose his way, but out of the blue came a god-send biker who dropped him at the venue in time. Start of the run was a challenge since he had to run with a torch in hand for nearly one hour. There was a risk of losing a lot of energy with every trip, so he had to be very careful. Most of the fellow runners were experienced runners; they knew their way around. Muthu pays his gratitude to the volunteers who kept a close watch on him throughout. Second half of the run was challenging since the weather was warmer than usual. Muthu finished his first full marathon with a time of 4:20.

Rajee fondly mentions that Muthu has never been fussy about his diet even after running. His carb-loading diet mostly depends on the availability and circumstances. His popular choices are curd rice, pasta, bread and milk. He does not expect his family to be there at the finish line to cheer for him. Rajee says, “When Muthu is home after a run, his energy levels are pretty much similar to what it was before the run”. The schedule of his family members, including Tutu, remains uninterrupted because of his runs. He confides in his survival skills, does not avoid occasional late nights and socializing with family and friends and most importantly does not crib about odd circumstances. His family has now comfortably come around with his running and wishes him for a better performance for every run.

Muthu used to be a person who would drive to a location just for a run, finish his run and drive back. But Pune has changed this for him since there is at least one event in the city every month and there are organized long runs with Free Runners. After coming to Pune, Muthu has started running more and faster. Rajee is also glad that he does not have to go through an arduous drive just for a run, gets to rest enough and spend time with family. Muthu can easily run a half marathon now without water. Muthu has set his eyes on ultra running now. It will be interesting to see what comes out of this Pandora ’s Box.

Free Runners was the first group running experience for Muthu. He still remembers his run at Pune International Marathon in Dec 2013. Nitin came all the way to support him on cycle for 35 kms. He did not have to stop to ask for directions when there were no markers on the road, because Nitin did that for him. Rupesh and Ankita were cheering for him at the finish line and later helped him to stretch and relax. He was and is still touched by these gestures; he had never asked for this support. He looks forward to his runs with fast runners in the group such as Vivek and Shyamal that help him to get faster and better every day. He is delighted with how the group has evolved. He carefully balances his group runs and solo runs. He believes one needs to run solo at times to cross certain barriers. He does his jolly bit to get me on to my toes, “A group helps people like you and Sophia who stumble upon from bed, show up for run and wake up somewhere en-route. You would have probably not run if you knew no one was waiting for you.” 

He wishes to see more representation of Free Runners in the events as a group. His advice to the new runners, “Just enjoy the run in the first few years and don’t give up. Pace and distance will come. You are fortunate to have the most vital training about form, breathing, pre and post run regimes, a well planned schedule under a diligent guidance of a mentor like Jeetu. These things are hard to come by. Take the maximum advantage of it. Have your own source of motivation rather than being too dependent on others for it”
<a href="http://www.darshtechnosoft.com/newrunner/index.php/stories-2/ ‎">
</a>

</div>